---
title: '"Sprichst Du Wissenschaft? Do you speak science?'
date: 2020-01-31
permalink: /posts/2019/12/sprichst-du-wissenschaft/
tags:
  - languages
  - STEM
  - communication
---

This is how learning foreign languages has shaped my scientific studies and research.

Sprichst Du Wissenschaft? Do you speak science? 
------
### The STEM/humanities divide
#### We students come to a time when we must specialize in our education. I remember the initial decision between STEM and humanities courses as a junior in high school. I was not ready to give up either, so I overloaded on courses.  I loved English and history, and I took every course in Spanish that I could. When there were none left, I self-directed an independent study in Spanish literature from medieval to modern works. I also took college-level courses in chemistry and calculus. I even remember seeing the Schroedinger wave equation for the first time, deciphering each term with my foundling knowledge. Basically, I delayed the STEM vs. humanities decision until I had a college application before me with an empty space next to “proposed field of study.”

#### With college on the horizon, I decided I loved both chemistry and calculus, and chemical engineering was the best option to deepen my understanding in both subjects. Thus, I chose STEM, meaning I would not be able to devote my deep concentration to the humanities. In my teenage, dramatizing mind, it was like a break-up—which I had never suffered, but could imagine—where I had had something daily in my life, and decided for something else. 

### "Science isn't finished until it's communicated" 
#### As a freshman in college, I didn't know what scientific research was. I had never stood in a real laboratory. My university had a summer program for freshmen to try out research, so I figured I’d give it a go. I spent a few weeks during my freshman summer synthesizing and studying 2D materials, MXenes, and I got hooked. I liked doing something *real*, that I could see, interpret, and report. I realized that research is performed, written, and spoken. Developing written and oral communication skills is key to becoming a good researcher. I thought of great researchers in the past: "renaissance" men and women literally and figuratively. They did not silo themselves into a single discipline, rather maintained their interests and view on life holistically. I could develop my interests in the humanities again through research. 

### Learning through immersion
#### I applied to do research abroad in Germany for six months during my sophomore year of college. It landed me in the small town of Steinfurt, boasting 33,000 inhabitants, outside Münster, Germany. In such a small town, few people had a confident command of the English language, and most people had never met an American before. All this to say, to survive, I needed to learn German.

#### I filled out grammar workbooks, I went to lectures, I spoke imperfect German at anyone who would respond. I hung out at the university *Wohnheim*, and I made friends with a German family. Little-by-little, the garble on the trains started to make sense. I could read short stories, then chapter books; the visualization of what I read would show in my mind like a movie on a dodgy film reel projector. I had a friend at the University of Leeds, a German professor, to whom I would write long letters. She sprinkled her long responses with idiomatic expressions such as *ich druecke die Daumen* (meaning *I press my thumbs* -- a way to wish good luck). 

#### At the same time, I was learning about electrochemistry-- using an applied potential to drive chemical reactions. My day-to-day work consisted of doing experiments with the archetypal electrochemical cell: depositing catalysts on an electrode; watching current develop when producing hydrogen. My group members, a handful of PhD students, helped me understand concepts in voltammetry and impedance spectroscopy. I would read papers that I did not yet understand much like I read German works of literature that I did not understand. I found that learning a field of science by immersion was strikingly similar to learning a language by immersion. In both cases, I lost the fear of making mistakes when communicating something I was still learning, knowing that I could correct those mistakes.  

### Science + foreign languages = positive reinforcement
#### It became apparent that learning German would directly enhance my scientific studies. I began to see the origin of scientific concepts that had become second-nature. One sunny day in Steinfurt, Germany, the instructor of a course I audited, Materialwissenschaft (material science), mentioned the “Aufbau Principle,” describing how electrons fill energy states in an atom. I had been familiar with the principle since high school, along with other electron configuration rules named for German-speaking physicists, such as “Hund’s Rule” and the “Pauli Exclusion Principle.” Learning about famous physicists and their discoveries in their native language gave me a more intimate perspective on their findings. During this lecture, however, I realized that Aufbau was not the last name of German-speaking physicist, but the German word for “building up” or “construction.” Just as builders construct the ground level of a house before the upper levels, electrons occupy the ground state energy level before filling consecutive energy levels. My understanding of the German language allowed me to visualize what was happening instead of merely memorizing it. 

#### Beyond knowing the definition of some sciency words, I began to explain my science in German. I found that explaining experiments and phenomena in a foreign language naturally led to having a new perspective on the procedures, results, and scientific interpretation. 

#### After 6 months in Germany, I returned to the US for the next few years of my studies. The German language skills stuck around--and continued to enrichen my learning.  I learned about *eigenvectors* in Linear Algebra and Quantum Mechanics. I learned about *ungerade* and *gerade* symmetry in spectroscopy. I learned about *zusammen* and *entegegen* isomers in organic chemistry, and in thermodynamics, I learned about Helmholtz free energy, labeled A for *arbeit*,the German word for "work."

#### At other internships, even at the U.S. Army Research Laboratory and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, I found ways where communicating in German and Spanish helped me understand science and connect to international researchers. It became true for French and conversational Italian as well, after over a year of research in Switzerland, post-graduation. 

### Finding the balance in graduate school
#### Now as a first-year graduate student, I am inundated with psets, rotating in a couple research groups to assess “research fit”, and not yet certain about the direction of my career. It all seems to detract from my ability to practice languages and hone communication skills.  I still find traces of ways that my study of other languages enrichens my understanding (*side note: my professors are obsessed with German words “Ansatz” (educated guess) and “Gestalt” (form or shape). Not only can I understand the full meaning of these words, I can also laugh at how they are pronounced*). And when it comes time for me to be a full-time researcher, I will have the autonomy to pursue my scientific and personal interests. I believe that these interests will have positive reinforcement, such that my improvement in communication via five languages will enhance my scientific endeavors, and vice versa. 

### Encouragement to students everywhere
#### In general, I want to encourage younger students to purse their interests, no matter how orthogonal to their studies these interests may seem.  More specifically, if you have the privilege to access foreign language studies, consider it heavily. Speaking in different languages naturally leads you to think about the world differently. It also establishes and reinforces international connections in a globalizing world. There is something vibrant and personal when a person can speak another person’s mothertongue without consulting Google translate. Even further, there is true substance in reading a masterpiece, whether it be a novel, famous scientific work, or work of philosophy, in the language in which it was written. To understand the world in a new perspective and deeply connect with it, this is the end of pursuing interdisciplinary passions-- especially those passions to learn new languages-- regardless of your formal field of training. 
