---
title: 'Online'
date: 2021-01-31
permalink: /posts/2021/01/online
tags:
  - online

---

I have been quiet for a while. Muted, rather. My thoughts were loud, my writings long, but they were private. I'm returning after a period of reflecting and hoping that
the passage of time would make the new reality feel more real.  

A year ago the virus broke out on a different continent, arrived in a different state, 
ravaged a different coast. Surely it couldn't affect my loved ones, surely it couldn't affect me... but it came closer and closer. I saw acquaintances of acquaintances contract the virus, then my acquaintances,
then family of friends, then friends, then my family. 

When we lost a family member I was reading Isabel Allende's *La casa de los espiritus.*

"No quedó familia que no tuviera alguien a quien llorar"
No family was without someone to mourn.

When the virus became politicized, when people in power jeopardized the safety of their own constituents, when bandages were ripped off of sore wounds of
generations, I needed to back away from the Internet. It stole my focus, it fed division to my mind. All I could think about was 'us' and 'them.' I deleted my Twitter and Facebook, deactivated my other social media accounts. I stopped writing here, and I kept my entries on my hard drive and in my notebooks. 

What brings me back here are these year-anniversary reflections. When pain and suffering are happening to others, on other continents, they find their way to us too.
The pain and suffering of others is our pain and suffering. We cannot purely exist as individual nations, and we cannot exist purely as individuals.  And our privilege, our lives, are fragile. No human is immune to calamity. 
When nations and facets of society don't come together to problem-solve, we have disasters such as the COVID-19 pandemic. When blame-shifting and selfish actions abound, 
the result is death. 

I think about the challenges that I want to pursue in research: sustainable access to clean water and secure food sources. In my privilege I do not 
feel the water or food insecurity that exist in this country or on other continents. I do know that the struggle exists, that we need to address it now out of human solidarity. I also know that in the  
coming century, even privileged nations will feel water stress and the impacts of unsustainable agriculture. I cannot address these challenges alone -- nor can an entire research field. 
Our best chance is with teamwork, between nations, scientists, policy-makers, constituents. 





 
